# Big Data in Healthcare :hand: fa18-523-73

Wangtong | wangton@iu.edu | hid: fa18-523-73

##### Keywords: Big data, healthcare, healthcare informatics, unstructured data.

## Abstract

The research paper aims to establish the application of Big Data in the analysis, interpretation, and storage of medical records in the healthcare system. Big Data is used in the analysis of healthcare informatics, which consists of complex data sets that are hard to store, resolve, organize, process, and interpret. The benefits obtained from the application of Big Data in the healthcare system include reduced costs incurred in the delivery of healthcare services, optimal management of information, prevention of the side effects of drugs on patients, the discovery of treatments for incurable diseases, and improved service delivery. The challenges faced in the use of Big Data in the healthcare system include problems with analyzing unstructured data, focusing on correlations rather than casualty, privacy issues which act as barriers in the collection of information, data security due to hacking, and reluctance by health care centers to share patient data due to competition. 

## Introduction

Big Data is the vast amounts of complex information which require advanced technology to assist in their capture, storage, distribution, management, and analysis. The Big Data characteristics can be explained using the 6Vs, which are velocity, volume, value, variety, variability, and veracity. The former implies the data sets are generated at very high speeds. The volume stands for large amounts of data sets that require analysis. The value suggests the vital information that is contained in the data to be analyzed. The variety stands for all types of data sets such as structured, semi-structured, and unstructured. The variability aspect entails the changes that occur during the processing of data. The veracity of the data sets collected implies that it is consistent and it can be trusted. The Big Data evolution can be attributed to the technological innovations of artificial intelligence, the internet of things, the fifth generation of the internet, and advancements in machine learning. The emergence of Big Data is essential to the growth of all fields. Therefore, the application of Big Data in the healthcare system will help to increase the speed, volume, accuracy, and efficiency in the analysis of the complex healthcare records. 

## Requirements of the Electronic Health Records

The electronic health records (EHR) is a system that has been developed by software engineers and contains information regarding the health care system. The data provided in the EHRs include patient information, medications, diagnoses of diseases, procedures, signs and symptoms of conditions, visit dates and times, and clinical notes of the healthcare practitioners. The data stored by the EHR system can either be structured or unstructured. The former include administrative data such as the demographics of the patients, diagnoses, and procedures. Unstructured data mainly entails the clinical notes that are taken by the doctor, and are the most efficient way for clinical documentation because they rely on human intuition. The unstructured data is difficult to analyze because of the format used since it may contain grammatical errors, abbreviations related to medicine, and spelling errors. The large amount of information about the patients and healthcare in the EHR system has led to the need for computer-based methods to help in the organization, analysis, and interpretation of the data sets. Hence, the adoption of Big Data in the EHR system has been essential due to the high speed involved in the analysis of the extensive medical health records. 

## The Architecture of the Electronic Health Record

The data in the electronic healthcare record system can be categorized into various forms that include genomic, clinical notes, behavior, patient sentiments, clinical reference, and administrative. Genomic data is a category which contains the DNA sequence, gene expression, and genotyping[@fa18-523-73-Wang2015]. Clinical notes are unstructured data sets that include a diagnostic testing report, medical images, patient discharge summaries, and the doctor’s notes[@fa18-523-73-Wang2015]. The patient sentiments contain personal information about them such as their demographics. Clinical reference data is information from text-based applications such as journals, articles, clinical research, websites, and product information.  Administrative data involves information from the health care center that allows others from outside the context to understand the medical records[@fa18-523-73-Wang2015]. Therefore, through the understanding of the various categories of data in the electronic healthcare record system, a proper analysis can be made on the available information
. 
In addition, the EHR system contains the aspect of interoperability, which implies the ability to share data between various health center facilities. The descriptive information about the patient’s demographics, pharmaceuticals, and diagnoses need to be recorded in a way that allows sharing across different healthcare facilities. The institutions can implement internal encoding mechanisms that assist in the analysis of the data collected before sharing of the information with other health center facilities. Additionally, administrative data should be included in the EHR system to allow for an understanding of the information contained in the records outside the context in which they were recorded. However, the main hindrance to the health records data interoperability is the lack of a similar data standard being used by the different healthcare centers. The barrier creates the need to establish a systematic widely accepted data-encoding scheme that will enable hospitals to share descriptive information about patients contained in their EHR system. Thus, data interoperability provides for the ease of sharing EHR by hospitals, which allows research to be easily conducted. 

Furthermore, the EHR system also makes it possible for data mining, which is the extraction of the information contained in the electronic health records. It entails the use of various techniques, which include regression analysis, classification, associate rule learning, and temporal data mining. Regression analysis involves the estimation of the correlation between the independent and the dependent variables. Regression linear model fitting can be used if the dependent variables adopt distributions such as binomial, normal, and Poisson. Classification involves techniques such as k-nearest neighbors and the decision trees. It is effective in clinical applications. It involves the assigning of a new observation to a class through building statistical models. Associate rule learning uses the numerous associations among clinical variables to predict the occurrence of phenomena. Temporal data mining is based on the fact that it is hard to generalize the outcome of a treatment to a given patient because of the difference in the clinical variables. Therefore, the vast amounts of complex data contained in the EHR allow for the extraction of the data using data mining. 

## Implementation of Big Data in Electronic Health Record

The implementation of Big Data in the EHR system has improved the ease of capture, storage, organizing, interpretation, and the analysis of the data sets. Furthermore, it has made the system more reliable, accurate, and efficient in service delivery when compared to the traditional system that was being used to keep the medical records. The benefits gained from the implementation of Big Data in the electronic health records outweigh the challenges faced. Therefore, the implementation of Big Data in EHR is a necessity that will help to make the health care system efficient in service delivery. 

## Benchmark of Big Data in EHR Systems

The benchmark of Big Data in the electronic health record system involves the analysis of the benefits, opportunities, and the challenges faced in the implementation process. The benefits of adopting Big Data in the EHR system include precision medicine, reduced costs incurred in treatment, and the optimization of the workflow in the healthcare center. The challenges faced include data hacking, privacy issues and the analysis of unstructured data. Thus, despite the difficulties in implementing Big Data in EHR systems, its adoption is inevitable by the hospitals. 

### Benefits of Big Data in EHR Systems

The first benefit of the adoption of Big Data in electronic health records is precision medicine. Through the evolution of Big Data, high-performance genome analysis technology was invented which allows for the collection of large amounts of genomic data. Additionally, new analytical algorithms have been designed to help analyze the genomic data collected (“Big Data Technologies in Healthcare,” 2016). The high-performance genome analysis technology enables the healthcare facilities to compare the genomic data of one patient to a large population of other individuals (“Big Data Technologies in Healthcare,” 2016). The comparison helps to establish the emergence of rare diseases. Moreover, it not only helps the healthcare facilities to develop a diagnosis of the illness but also prevent its spread to other members of the population. Nevertheless, it allows for the improved efficiency in service delivery due to the systematic collection and the analysis of genetic data. Other benefits obtained from the concept include the selection of the best treatments, avoidance of the side effects of diagnoses to the patients, and the elimination of ineffective therapies. Therefore, precision medicine has been crucial in improving efficiency in healthcare operations. 

Moreover, the adoption of Big Data in the electronic healthcare records has reduced the costs incurred for medication. The technology has allowed the health care centers to notice the early signs of diseases such as cancer (“Big Data Technologies in Healthcare,” 2016). The earlier recognition allows the individuals to meet the low costs incurred in treating the primary phase rather than the high bills needed for the final period of the disease. Furthermore, the health facilities have reduced the expenditures incurred in the research of new drugs for the treatment of diseases because of the ease of access to information required for research purposes in the EHR. At the same time, the hospitals can administer treatment on a performance basis whereby the practitioners receive money because of the outcome of the diagnoses rather than the time spent treating a patient (“Big Data Technologies in Healthcare,” 2016). Hence, the adoption of Big Data in the health care system has helped to reduce the costs incurred by both the hospital and the patients during the treatment of diseases.
 
Besides, the adoption of Big Data in the healthcare facilities has optimized workflows in healthcare centers. It has enabled various departments within the hospital to share information using the electronic healthcare register and reduce the movements from one department to another (“Big Data Technologies in Healthcare,” 2016). Additionally, the practitioners can communicate their findings on patients with each other and establish the best selection of treatment that will help in the diagnoses of disease. The communication of the departments using the EHR allows for better utilization of the resources of the healthcare facility. Moreover, it also brings higher efficiency in service delivery by the health care facility to the patients (“Big Data Technologies in Healthcare,” 2016). Thus, the optimization in the workflow within a healthcare facility is a benefit obtained due to the implementation of Big Data in the EHR system. 

### Challenges of Big Data in EHR Systems	

The first challenge faced in the implementation of Big Data in healthcare systems is the analysis of unstructured data. The test results, scanned documents, X-ray images, and progress notes are some of the examples of unstructured data found in the EHR of a healthcare facility (Wang & Alexander, 2015). The large volumes of unstructured data, such as medical imaging, are difficult to handle by the EHR systems. Additionally, extracting potentially useful information from the unstructured data is difficult. It is also problematic to understand the informal clinical notes because of the context in which they were written (Wang & Alexander, 2015). Thus, analysis of unstructured data is a key challenge faced in the implementation of Big Data in electronic health records. 

Moreover, privacy issues are another challenge faced in the adoption of Big Data by the electronic healthcare records. The hospital's ethical considerations demand the protection of the patient information, and it also restricts the sharing of the data without the consent of the individuals. The aspect of privacy concerns hinders data interoperability among various healthcare facilities that would have aided in the efficiency of service delivery by the hospitals. The reason is Big Data requires data interoperability. Nevertheless, the healthcare facilities can employ privacy protection mechanisms to help protect the information of the patients from loss or unauthorized access. 

Another challenge faced with the implementation of Big Data in the EHR is the aspect of data hacking. Healthcare facilities have incurred high costs due to the leakage of data (Wang & Alexander, 2015). Apart from being sued by the patients whose medical information is leaked, the hospitals also face the loss of their patients due to a lack of trust. Additionally, the hospital is held at ransom by the hackers who demand money in exchange for the information obtained. Nevertheless, the healthcare facilities have adopted the use of biometrics, such as fingerprints and voice recognition software, to reduce the leakage of data and improve protection of information about the patients from the electronic health record system (Wang & Alexander, 2015). Hence, hacking is a menace that hinders the implementation of the Big Data in the EHR system. 

## Conclusion

The adoption of Big Data in EHR is inevitable because of the benefits associated with its approval. The advantages related to Big Data include best selection of treatment for diagnoses, reduced costs incurred, optimal management of information, prevention of the side effects of drugs on patients, and discovery of treatments for incurable diseases. Despite the benefits associated with the concept, it faces challenges such as privacy issues, difficulty in the analysis of unstructured data, and data hacking. Further studies need to be carried out to establish on the ways to minimize the challenges encountered in the implementation of Big Data. Therefore, the application of Big Data in the health care systems is essential for an improvement in service delivery. 









